CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
While the present analysis intends to be only a case study in the hopes of spurring a more comprehensive analysis of state level adoption and timing of adoption of restrictive immigration policies, several meaningful conclusions can be drawn from these results.  Overall the findings concerning time and partisan politics are not surprising given the history of the E-Verify system.  President Bush’s strengthening of the E-Verify system in 2005 may account for most of the results, as after 2005 states began to rapidly adopt such policies.  It is not surprising than that the most relevant variable may be time, as the strengthening of the system seemed to spur a wave adoption in the post 2005 era.  It is also not surprising then that states seemed to adopt E-Verify policies more quickly during republican presidential years.
Regarding the racial threat variables it may be the lack of significant results that is the most interesting.  Neither the size of a sate’s foreign-born nor its Hispanic population showed to be a significant predictor of timing until adoption.  This is surprising given both its indication that much of the discourse surrounding immigration surrounds these figurehead populations.  The lack of a significant effect of unemployment also goes against most conventional wisdom as the E-Verify system itself is tied to employers and employment.
While the present study provides a thorough analysis of the demographic, economic and political factors that shape the timing of state adoption of restrictive immigration policies, there are several areas in which future research should look to expand upon it.  First, the organizational mechanisms of state bureaucracies are not fully vetted in the present analysis.  Future research should consider borrowing insights from neo-institutional theory to examine the role that regional and network policy diffusion play in the adoption and timing of state-level immigration reforms.  Second, while the present analysis focused on state-level immigration responses that used the E-Verify system, future research should consider examining other types of state level responses that may target other institutions such as healthcare and the educational system.  In addition it would be worthwhile to know if states that target one type of institution to control immigration are likely to target another.  Third, future research should consider not only static demographic predictors of state-level adoption of immigration control, but also the change in populations.  For example, the literature on immigration has begun to explore the impact of new immigrant destinations.  Areas with large immigrant populations may have already woven this dynamic into its cultural fabric, such as in California, but states fairly new to immigration may respond more oppressively to immigration. Finally, if anything this analysis has highlighted the importance of examining the role of the states in shaping immigration policy.  Future research should continue to explore the determinates of state level immigration control in cotemporary times, but also empirically explore the role that state’s have played across history.
