Recent state level immigration legislation by numerous states over the last decade including Arizona, Georgia, and Alabama have sparked conversations about the role of state level control of immigration.  Though these perceived encroachments into an area typically seen as a federal level of governance may seem recent, and are often portrayed as such in the popular press, the reality of state involvement in immigration is that states have involved themselves in its enforcement in some capacity since the founding of the country (Neuman 1993; Neuman 1996).  Historically states targeted institutions such as healthcare and employers to control immigration.  More recent immigration reforms, beginning with California Proposition 187, have mirrored these historical developments by regulating immigration in a more nuanced form of governmental social control (Varsanyi 2010) that  have avoided the use of the criminal justice system as the primary arm of enforcement and have instead focused on utilizing the legislatures purse strings and other regulatory mechanisms to monitor institutions such as healthcare, education, and employment.
Not surprisingly state activity in immigration policy has generated much empirical inquiry with examinations into the adoption(e.g. Boushey and Luedtke 2011), timing (e.g. Newman et al. 2012), quantity(e.g. Boushey and Luedtke 2011), and impact (e.g.*) of state immigration policies.  Research focusing on explanations of state immigration policy adoption often juxtapose accounts based on economic conditions, partisan politics, foreign born population size and ethnoracial minority concentration.  However, much of this empirical research is limited by its focus on only local state conditions without regard for extra-local interstate spatial arrangements or the contextual influence of national politics. The limited cases that do consider extra-local influences on state immigration policy adoption often model the potential for policy diffusion as a binary indicator of immigration legislation in a bordering state.  While popular in event history models, this approach treats the threat of spatial policy diffusion in states like Georgia where five out of five  neighboring states adopted E-verify as the same as Idaho where only one of six neighboring states adopted E-verify.  Additionally, there are reasons to believe that states may respond to conditions in neighboring states other than immigration legislation.  For example, in line with economic and racial threat arguments, state legislatures or constituents may see high unemployment or a large presence of ethnoracial minority populations in neighboring states as threatening economic and political power and may adopt restrictive immigration policies as a result.  Moreover, conditions in neighboring states may also moderate the influence of local conditions, suggesting a complex interplay between local and extra-local factors.  In short a more nuanced consideration of spatial dependence would take into account the collective presence of immigration policy adoption in all neighboring states as well as the spatial arrangements of other conditions that are argued to spur the adoption of restrictive immigration policies, but to date the extant literature has failed to consider extra-local influence.
Using data for the years 2006-2013 from the National Conference of State Legislatures, the American Community Survey, the US Decennial Census, the Council of State Government's Book of States, the Federal Elections Commission, and the National Institute on Money in State Politics, the present analysis will focus more narrowly on the pathways through which extra-local factors influence the timing of state adoption of the E-verify system.  To analyze these spatial arrangements I first create a spatial weights matrices using a k-nearist neighbors approach, before employing spatial logit models to test for inter-state spatial dependence in the timing of everify-adoption.  I then estimate a series of discrete choice event history models that analyze the additive and multiplicative influence of extra-local conditions on the timing of local E-verify policy adoption.
