E-VERIFY SYSTEM

The E-Verify system allows employers to check work eligibility by verifying employees’ identities using federal databases. The program was started by the federal government as a result of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) 1996, though it has its origins in the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) (Rosenblum 2011).
Focusing on the E-Verify provides two primary advantages as a case study for exploring the determinants of the timing of state adoption of immigration regulation.  Though E-Verify has been available to states since 1997 it has been at the center of recent state level immigration control, especially since 2005 when the Bush administration improved its capabilities (Rosenblum 2011).  Second, immigration control policies aimed at the regulation of businesses have received a large body of support from the general public and may continue to be a driving force in the future of state level immigration regulation.  For example, a 2010 Ipsos/McClatchy Poll found that when asked to state their level of agreement to the statement, "The best way to tackle the issue of illegal immigration is to go after the businesses who hire illegal immigrants," 41% of respondents said that they strongly agree, while 23% of respondents said that they tend to agree.  Given this level of support it is reasonable to expect policies that focus on employer regulation to continue to be at the forefront of this wave of state immigration regulation.



LITERATURE, THEORY, AND HYPOTHESIS

To date almost no literature has examined the determinants of state adoption of immigration control policies.  There does exist relevant literature on the determinants of immigration control at the more local level however.  Research done by Ramakrishnan and colleagues (Ramakrishnan and Wong 2010; Ramakrishnan and Lewis 2005) has found that several political, economic, and demographic factors may influence the likelihood that city governments adopt pro, anti, or no immigration related reforms. Ramakrishnan and Lewis (2005) found that municipal governments with conservative city councils in Republican districts were more likely to resist the use of foreign languages in public documents. Ramakrishnan and Wong (2010) also found that cities in republican districts and with an increased proportion of Hispanics were more likely to adopt restrictive immigration ordinances and less likely to adopt adaptive immigration ordinances.
Despite these shortcomings in the extant literature relevant parallels can be drawn between the legislative policies aimed at the control of illegal immigration and the broader literature on social control and punishment.  In it’s broadest conception illegal immigration is a violation of federal law and therefore the discourse surrounding its regulation often takes a similar form as the discourse surrounding crime.  The present analysis will focus on three explanations that seem particularly relevant to the issue of state control of immigration: racial threat perspectives, economic threat perspectives, and political partisanship perspectives.
