DATA, VARIABLES, AND METHODS
Data and Variables
Table 1 presents the dependent and independent variables, their theoretical conceptualization grouping, the source of the data, the means, and standard deviations.  The dependent variable in the present analysis is the timing until state adoption of policies that requires employers in one form or another to use the E-Verify system1.   The dates of adoption were taken from the National Conference of State Legislature (NCSL), a non-partisan group that serves legislators and staffs across the United States and its territories.
Data for the focal independent variables measuring racial threat come from the American Community Survey and the US Census Bureau’s Intercensal estimates.  More specifically the measures of ethnoracial concentration, nativity, and socioeconomic status were calculated for the years 2006-2013 using the yearly estimates provided by the American Community Survey (ACS).
Data for the measure of economic threat, unemployment, came from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).  Data for the partisan composition of the state legislature and the party of the state governor was taken from, The Book of States (BOS) series distributed by the Council of State Governments.  Two variables were created from this data the first, republican legislature, has a value of 1 when Republicans controlled both chambers of the state legislature or when their was no clear majority in one chamber and the other chamber was under republican control.  A second measure, republican governor, was coded 1 when the governor of a state was a republican and was coded 0 in all other cases.  A final variable, republican president, was coded 1 in the years that their was a republican president and 0 zero in the years their was a democratic president.

TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

Analytical Strategy

The analytical strategy employed in the current analysis utilizes discrete-time event history analysis using spatial logit GMM to assess the effects of covariates on the timing until adoption of E-Verify requirements.  The dependent variable can be interpreted as the hazard rate for adopting E-Verify requirements for employers.  Larger coefficients represent a larger probability that a state would adopt a state law sooner.
