Racial Threat

The racial threat theories generally predict that discriminatory actions or policies will predominate in areas with large minority populations due to the perceived threat this group poses to the dominant group (Blalock, 1970; Blumer, 1958). From the majority groups view minority groups and the foreign born are seen illicit intruders who openly threaten the status quo power arrangement (Bobo and Hutchings, 1996).  In the most prominent of these theories, Blalock (1970) argued that the minority group poses political and economic threats to the dominant groups authority, resulting in what Blalock calls a “power contest” in which the dominant group uses discriminatory practices, such as social control, to prevent the minority group from obtaining and mobilizing resources in a way that might threaten the current power structure.
Bonocich’s (1972) split labor market theory offers another explanation of how the minority group poses an economic threat to the dominant group and may be of particular relevance to the unique antagonism brought on by immigrant groups.  In a split labor market there our three competing classes, the business class, higher paid labor (usually native whites), and cheaper labor (usually immigrant non-whites).  Ethnic antagonism comes about when the labor market split between higher and lower paid labor corresponds to a split between ethnic groups. The employers use the cheaper laborers to reduce the bargaining power of the higher paid laborers through strikebreaking or using them as replacement workers.  This leads to antagonism between the higher paid labor and the lower paid labor groups.
To combat the lower wage groups, the well-organized higher wage groups will use either an exclusion system or a caste system, depending on the nature of the cheaper labor group.  An exclusion system is used when the lower paid labor group is also a migrant group.  The goal of the system is to prevent the immigrant group from permanently settling in the area.  A caste system is used when the cheaper labor is already settled in the area.  This system tries to combat low wage labor groups by restricting their access to jobs in three interrelated ways: blocking access to education and training, monopolizing work skills, and weakening the political power of the lower wage laborers.  This puts the subordinate ethnic group at a disadvantage in terms of wage demands, because it has lower levels of three resources: standard of living, available information, and political resources.  The E-Verify system seems particularly relevant to the idea of blocking access to employment.
At the aggregate level large minority populations have been tied to increased use of a variety of state and local level social control outcomes in a variety of areas including larger police forces (Jacobs 1979; Kent and Jacobs 2005), higher levels of police expenditures (Jackson and Carroll 1981), increased spending on corrections (Jacobs and Helms 1999), higher arrest rates (Brown and Warner, 1992; Liska and Chamlin 1984; Liska, Chamlin, and Reed 1985), higher incarceration rates (Britt, 2000; Greenberg and West, 2001; Jacobs and Carmichael, 2001; Jacobs and Kleban, 2003; Keen and Jacobs, 2009), historical cases of lynching (Corzine, Creech, and Corzine, 1983), the presence of the death penalty (Jacobs and Carmichael, 2002), death sentences (Jacobs, Carmichael, and Kent, 2005), and executions (Jacobs et al., 2007). Large minority populations have also been tied to feelings of economic (King and Wheelock 2007), political, and criminal treat (Chiricos, Hogan, and Gertz, 1997; Chiricos, McEntire, and Gertz, 2001; Covington and Taylor, 1991; Liska, Lawrence, and Sanchirico, 1982; Quillian and Pager, 2001) in dominant group members. These feelings of threat have, in turn, been tied to higher levels of punitive support in dominant group populations (King and Wheelock, 2007) and increased use of and capacity for social control (Stults and Baumer, 2007).
Of particular importance to the present analysis is the extant in which this perspective has informed research on state level legislative action.  One such example is particularly informative to the present analysis for racial threats role in the timing of adoption of legeslation.  Behrens et al. (2003) examined the determinants of the expansion and liberalization of felony disenfranchisement laws and found that the timing of adoption and liberalization were heavily influenced by the size of a state’s non-white and black populations.
Given this theoretical basis, concerning the timing of the adoption of E-Verify legislation we would expect that:

H1:  States with a higher percentage of black residents will be most likely to adopt E-Verify requirements of employers.

H2: States with a higher percentage of Hispanic residents will be most likely to adopt E-Verify requirements of employers.

H3: States with a higher percentage of foreign born residents will be most likely to adopt E-Verify requirements of employers.

Economic Threat

Most of the empirical research exploring Marxist explanations for increases in social control and have focused on the more basic elements of Marx’s theory expressed by Rusche and Kirchheimer (1939).  Rusche and Kirchheimer argue that the forms of punishment a society utilizes are based on the society’s mode of production.  A society with an advanced capitalist mode of production is more likely to use imprisonment as the predominant form of punishment.  This is especially apparent during times of economic downturn, as a result Rusche and Kirchheimer predict a direct relationship between unemployment and imprisonment (Inverarity and McCarthy 1988).
While this line of theory is most directly relevant to punishment a parallel may be extended to the regulation of immigration as well, as one of the key components of the theory is surplus labor.  One of the key issues of the immigration debate has been the extent to which immigrants and particularly illegal immigrants threaten the employment stability of American nationals. States may therefore adopt more restrictive policies aimed to curb immigration during times of economic down turns and especially during times of high unemployment.  In this way immigration control may parallel the use of imprisonment that Rusche and Kirchheimer talk about.  One current analysis of deportations speaks to both areas of immigration and formal social control.  King et al. (2012) found that surplus labor was of particular importance in predicting deportations during eras in which immigrants are used as scapegoats in the media for economic woes.  Given this possible connection between surplus labor, immigration, and more restrictive immigration policies and practices we would expect that:

H4:  States with high levels of unemployment will be most likely to adopt E-Verify requirements of employers.

Partisan Politics

Research in other areas of state level social control has focused on the unique role played by partisan politicians who seek to use issues like crime and immigration as possible wedge issues to curry favor with independent voters (Jacobs et al., 2007; Jacobs and Carmichael 2001; Jacobs, Carmichael, and Kent 2005; Jacobs and Kleban 2003; Keen and Jacobs 2009; Bahrehns et al. 2003).  
Of particular importance to the present analysis however, is the political history of immigration and its relation to party platforms.  The relevant literature (Ramakrishnan and Wong 2007) from analyses on city level adoption of restrictive and adaptive immigration ordinances has found that republican areas are more likely to adopt restrictive immigration ordinances and less likely to adopt adaptive ones.  These authors have speculated that large republican areas may indicate an ideological predisposition towards restrictive immigration policy and a dislike of immigration in general, but they also contend that these areas may be where immigration is the hottest issue and candidates may win votes by portraying themselves as more tough on immigration then their opponent.
	Based on these insights from prior literature we would expect that:
H5:  States with republican legislatures will be most likely to adopt E-Verify requirements of employers.

H6:  States with republican governors will be most likely to adopt E-Verify requirements of employers.

H7:  States with republican legislatures will be more likely to adopt E-Verify requirement of employers when there is a democratic president in office.
